Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
26 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
• Precision-Recall Curve (PRC), which is created by plotting precision (y-
axis) against recall (x-axis) at various threshold settings. The area under
this curve, namely PRC AUC, is another widely-used, threshold-agnostic
performance measure, and is also called Average Precision;
• Precision at n, or P@n, is defined as the precision of the observations ranked
among the top- n, where n ∈ {1, 2, ..., N}. In our experiments, we set n to
the number of injected contextual anomalies.
For completeness: precision is defined as #{Real anomalies}∩{Reported anomalies }
#{Reported anomalies } ,
while recall is defined as #{Real anomalies}∩{Reported anomalies }
#{Real anomalies} . We perform ten
independent trials of injecting contextual anomalies on each dataset and report
the means and standard deviations of each of the three evaluation criteria.
6.4 Anomaly Detection Performance
Results on 10 synthetic datasets and 20 real-world datasets are presented in
Tables 5, 6, and 7, where the first table concerns synthetic data, and the latter
two tables concern real-world data.
From Table 5, we observe that QCAD generally dominates other meth-
ods in terms of anomaly detection accuracy according to the average ranks.
More specifically, QCAD achieved the best results on 9 out of 10 synthetic
datasets in terms of PRC AUC and ROC AUC, and on all datasets in terms of
Precision@n. On Syn8, QCAD is on par with its best competitor (i.e., CAD) in
terms of ROC AUC, whereas QCAD is slightly worse than CAD and ROCOD
in terms of PRC AUC. This demonstrates the effectiveness of QCAD in iden-
tifying contextual anomalies for different forms and degrees of dependencies
between the behavioral features and contextual features. More importantly,
the poor performance of LoPAD indicates the importance of distinguishing
behavioral features from contextual features. Additionally, other traditional
anomaly detectors—including IForest, LOF,k-NN, SOD, and HBOS—perform
poorly on most datasets because they treat all features equally.
Another important observation is that QCAD is generally superior to other
methods in terms of robustness. That is, QCAD attains high PRC AUC, ROC
AUC, and Precision@n values with small standard deviations on Syn1, Syn2,
Syn3, Syn4 and Syn5, indicating that it is robust to different forms and degrees
of dependency relationships, including linearity and non-linearity. In contrast,
its strongest contender, CAD, has high standard deviations on Syn1 and Syn6.
One possible reason is that CAD gets trapped in a bad local minimum when
using expectation-maximization algorithm to learn parameters. Despite being
a contextual anomaly detector, ROCOD performs poorly on datasets Syn2 and
Syn5 in terms of PRC AUC and Precision@n. From the results on Syn6, Syn7,
Syn8, Syn9 and Syn10, it appears that a larger number of contextual features
does not substantially affect the performance of QCAD. Compared to other
contextual anomaly detectors, and specifically CAD, QCAD does not perform
particularly better on these synthetic datasets.