Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection 7
score. The local pattern is obtained using its neighbours, while the global pat-
tern is learned using all instances, making it difficult to associate the anomaly
score with individual features.
Despite the existence of numerous methods for explaining anomalies, such
as those outlined in recent (survey) papers (Panjei et al, 2022; Li et al, 2022;
Xu et al, 2021), there has been very limited research on contextual anomaly
explanation. Particularly, COIN (Liu et al, 2018) explains outliers by report-
ing their outlierness score, the features that contribute to its abnormality,
and a contextual description of its neighbourhoods. COIN treats all features
equally though, while our method divides features into contextual and behav-
ioral features. Further, we develop a visualisation that helps explain contextual
anomalies in addition to reporting the overall anomaly score, feature impor-
tance, contextual neighbours, and individual anomaly score for each behavioral
feature.
The following methods are less relevant because they consider slightly dif-
ferent problems. Valko et al (2011) construct a non-parametric graph-based
method for conditional anomaly detection, which only addresses the prob-
lem of a single categorical behavioral feature. Hayes and Capretz (2014) first
identify anomalies on behavioral features, and then refine the detected anoma-
lies by clustering all objects on contextual features. Tang et al (2015) detect
group anomalies from multidimensional categorical data. Hong and Hauskrecht
(2015) present a contextual anomaly detection framework dedicated to cat-
egorical behavioral features which also considers the dependencies between
behavioral features. Moreover, Zheng et al (2017) apply robust metric learn-
ing on contextual features to find more meaningful contextual neighbours and
then leverage k-NN kernel regression to predict the behavioral feature values.
Meghanath et al (2018) develop ConOut to automatically find and incorporate
multiple contexts to identify and interpret outliers.
2.2 Traditional Anomaly Detection
Although traditional anomaly detection considers a problem that is differ-
ent from contextual anomaly detection, dependency-based and subspace-based
anomaly detection leverage techniques that are related to our method.
2.2.1 Dependency-based Anomaly Detection
Dependency-based anomaly detection aims to identify anomalies by exploring
dependencies between features. Teng (1999) explores the dependency between
non-target and target features to identify and correct possible noisy data
points. To detect networking intrusions, Huang et al (2003) present Cross-
Feature Analysis to capture the dependency patterns between features in
normal networking traffic. To detect disease outbreaks, Wong et al (2003) pro-
pose to explore the dependency between features using a Bayesian network.
Noto et al (2010) propose to detect anomalies by using an ensemble of mod-
els, with each model exploring the dependency between a response feature