Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
34 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
Matheus Pereira has been exceptionally good at scoring goals and slightly
better than expected with regard to giving assists.
These results can be interpreted as: Matheus Pereira performed surprisingly
well in terms of goals and slightly better than expected in terms of assists
when compared to other midfielders and/or forwards aged 22-28 who played
more than 25 games and played more than 2000 minutes. Although we are not
football experts, we expect the automated detection and interpretable score
explanation of such ‘anomalies’ to be meaningful and possibly useful to football
coaches and scouts.
7 Conclusions
In this paper, we for the first time explicitly establish a connection between
dependency-based traditional anomaly detection methods and contextual
anomaly detection methods. On this basis, we propose a novel approach to
contextual anomaly detection and explanation. Specifically, we use Quantile
Regression Forests to develop a accurate and interpretable anomaly detec-
tion method, QCAD, that explores dependencies between features. QCAD can
handle tabular datasets with mixed contextual features and numerical behav-
ioral features. Extensive experiment results on various synthetic and real-world
datasets demonstrate that QCAD outperforms state-of-the-art anomaly detec-
tion methods in identifying contextual anomalies in terms of accuracy and
interpretability.
From the case study on football player data, we conclude that QCAD can
detect potentially meaningful and useful contextual anomalies that are directly
interpretable by a domain expert. The beanplot-based visualisations help to
explain why a certain object is (not) considered an anomaly within its context.
This is important because anomaly detection is an unsupervised problem and
the explanations can help analysts and domain experts to verify the results.
It also opens up opportunities for human-guided anomaly detection, where
feedback from the analyst can be used to guide the analysis.
In the future, given that QCAD can only handle static features, we plan
to extend QCAD to streaming settings.
Statement and Declaration
Ethical approval. The human and animal data involved in this study are
publicly available, and thus the need for approval was waived.
F unding. This work is supported by Project 4 of the Digital Twin research
programme, a TTW Perspectief programme with project number P18-03 that
is primarily financed by the Dutch Research Council (NWO). All opinions,
findings, conclusions and recommendations in this paper are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies.