Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
18 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
s(x|bq) =



η
100 , if is(x|bq) > η
100 ;
is(x|bq), otherwise,
(5)
where η is a hyperparameter. The rationale for η is as follows: if the con-
ditional distribution is uniformly distributed and the behavioral feature has
range [0 , 1], then the expected width of any percentile interval width is 0 .01
and η can be interpreted as the maximum number of expected percentile inter-
val widths . In the experiments we use η = 10 because of its strong empirical
performance (also shown in the ablation study in Appendix D).
By scaling the behavioral features to [0 , 1] before anomaly detection, e.g.,
using min-max normalization, the estimated conditional percentiles should also
lie in this interval and the interval widths obtained for the individual behavioral
features should thus be comparable. In turn, this implies they can be summed
to obtain the final anomaly score for a data point (Algorithm 1, Line 9).
5.2 Explaining Anomalies with Anomaly Beanplots
In the third phase, we provide explanations for the reported anomalies. From
the definition of our anomaly score it is clear that it is attributable: the overall
score can be decomposed into partial scores for individual behavioral features.
For each identified anomaly a, we report its contextual neighbours R(a)
and the final anomaly score as computed on Line 9 of Algorithm 1. Further,
we report the partial anomaly scores corresponding to the behavioral features,
i.e., we report s(x|bq) for all q, ranked from highest to lowest to indicate in
which behavioral features the anomaly deviates most.
Since visualisation often helps to quickly provide valuable insight, we pro-
pose the anomaly beanplot , a variant of the beanplot by Kampstra (2008).
Figure 4 shows an example, visually depicting the learned conditional per-
centiles, their interval widths, and the probability densities that can be
estimated from those, all for a particular data point and behavioral feature.
(Remember that a quantile regression forest is learned on the reference group of
a data point, hence the anomaly beanplot for each data point may be different.)
By including the actual value of the data point in the beanplot (as a hori-
zontal black line), the analyst can easily see how its behavioral feature value is
positioned relative to those of its reference group, and why and to what extent
it contributes to the its anomalousness.
6 Experiments
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our overall approach and proposed method
QCAD, we conduct experiments on a wide range of synthetic and real-world
datasets. We will first explain the choices regarding datasets, baseline algo-
rithms, and evaluation criteria, after which we present both quantitative results
and a case study that investigates interpretability and practical utility.