Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection 11
Compute Distance 
Matrix using 
Contextual Features
Findcontextual
nearest neighbours
foreachobject
Reference Group
Target
Report contextual neighbours 
(reference group)
Reported
Anomaly
Report
Context
Report
AnomalyScore
Decompose
Anomaly
Score
Reportraw anomalyscore
ineachbehavioural feature
Understandwhy
it isanomalous?
(a) Reference Group Generation (b) AnomalyExplanation
Fig. 2 Reference Group Generation and Anomaly Explanation. The Reference Group
Generation phase computes the distance matrix using only the contextual features, and finds
a reference group for each object on this basis. The Anomaly Explanation phase produces
an explanation for each identified anomaly by reporting its contextual neighbours, final
anomaly score, and raw anomaly scores in each behavioral feature.
space based on M. As a result, the k nearest neighbours of x form a reference
group, denoted as R(x, k), which serves as context in Problems 1 and 2.
For instance, as shown in Figure 2 (a), given
{Latitude, Longitude, Season} as the contextual feature set, we first calculate
the distance matrix in the contextual space Latitude × Longitude × Season.
Second, based on the distance matrix, we can find the three nearest neigh-
bours of any object as its reference group 2. Concretely, the three nearest
neighbours for x1 are {x2, x3, x4}, which forms a reference group for x1,
denoted as R(x1, 3).
Phase 2: Anomaly Detection
Given an object x ∈ X with its reference group R(x, k), we apply an anomaly
detector Anomaly to obtain an anomaly score based only on the behavioral
attribute values . We repeat the above process for all objects, leading to N
anomaly scores S = {s1, s2, ..., sN }. We sort S and use threshold ϕ to obtain
a ranked list of contextual anomalies A = {a1, ...,am, ...,aM }, with M ≪ N .
For example, we can apply an anomaly detector on the behavioral space
T emperature× Rain × W indof x1 and its reference group R(x1, 3) =
{x2, x3, x4}. As a result, we obtain anomaly score s1 for x1. Accordingly,
repeating this process leads to a set of anomaly scores S = {s1, ..., s16}. In
our running example we find {x4, x12, x13} as contextual anomalies, as they
behave differently in the behavioral space T emperature× Rain × W indwhen
compared to their corresponding neighbours defined in the contextual space
Latitude × Longitude × Season. For example, Oss (x4) has relatively stronger
winds in winter when compared to its nearest cities Leiden, Amsterdam and
Rotterdam.
2We use k = 3 for illustrative purposes; in practice, we would have a dataset with far more
than 16 records and k would also be much larger.