Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
14 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
0. Next, it takes the average of ωi(u, Tj(θ)) over all decision trees, i.e.,
ωi(u) = 1
K
KX
j=1
ωi(u, Tj(θ)), (2)
which is the weight assigned to an observationUi. Finally, conditional quantile
Qα(u) = inf {v : F (v | U = u) ≥ α} can be estimated by ˆQα(u) = inf {v :
ˆF (v | U = u) ≥ α}. Under reasonable assumptions, Meinshausen (2006)
proved quantile regression forests to be consistent, i.e.,
 ˆF (v | U = u) − F (v | U = u)

p
− →0, with n − → ∞ (3)
holds pointwise for every u.
5 Quantile-based Contextual Anomaly
Detection and Explanation
We present an instance of the generic approach for contextual anomaly
detection presented in Section 3.2 that is based on quantile regression forests.
The main idea of our method is to estimate the deviation of an object’s
behavioral values within a given context using uncertainty quantification
around predictions, where the predictions are assumed to capture ‘normal’
behavior. Then, a higher uncertainty implies a higher deviation within the
context and thus a higher degree of anomalousness. To this end several
approaches could be explored. For example, one might use multi-target regres-
sion models—such as Multivariate Random Forests (Segal and Xiao, 2011)—on
all behavioral features, or single-target regression models—such as Random
Forests (Breiman, 2001)—on individual behavioral features followed by aggre-
gation and conformal inference (Lei et al, 2018). In this paper we instead opt
to use Quantile Regression Forests (Meinshausen, 2006), a single-target regres-
sion model, because it is (relatively) simple, offering advantages with regard to
interpretability, and directly provides uncertainty quantifications. More con-
cretely, we derive intervals for the behavioral features from the underlying
quantile regression forests as inherent uncertainty quantifications around pre-
dictions, resulting in statistically sound and interpretable measures of degree
of anomaly.
In the first phase, we generate reference groups using a distance matrix
computed on the contextual space of all data points. Specifically, we use
Gower’s distance (Gower, 1971) (see Section 6.1.1 for more detail), to be able
to deal with both quantitative and categorical features, and select thek objects
having the smallest distances to an object x as its reference group R(x, k).
Next, in the second phase, an anomaly score is computed for each indi-
vidual data point, based on the values in the behavioral space of the data