Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
24 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
T able 4Summary of parameters involved in QCAD. Particularly, V aluerepresents the
values that we recommend to use in experiments.
Symbol Meaning V alue
k number of nearest neighbours min( N/2, 500)
nq number of conditional quantiles to estimate 100
nt number of trees used to construct a QRF 100 or 10
nf number of maximal features used to construct a tree |C|
ns minimum number of samples to split a node 10
h number of features used to generate explanations min( |B|, 3)
such as IForest, LOF, k-NN, SOD, and HBOS, we use their publicly avail-
able implementations in PyOD (Zhao et al, 2019) with their default settings.
Unfortunately, for LoPAD, CAD and ROCOD no implementation was pub-
licly available. For LoPAD, we first use the ‘bnlearn’ package (Scutari et al,
2019) in R to find the Markov Blankets of each dataset based on Fast-IAMB
(Yaramakala and Margaritis, 2005). Next, we implement the LoPAD algorithm
in Python using CART (Breiman et al, 2017) as the prediction model with
bagging size 200. For CAD, we implement the CAD-GMM-Full algorithm as
recommended by Song et al (2007), with default settings except for param-
eter ‘number of Gaussian component’; if this parameter would be set to its
default 30, it would take more than one month to finish all the experiments
on our computer. In addition, preliminary experiments show that the differ-
ence in results when this parameter is set to 30 and 5 respectively is negligible
for most datasets. We therefore set this parameter to 5 in all experiments.
We implemented ROCOD in Python with its default settings. One important
parameter, namely the distance threshold used to find neighbours, is not dis-
cussed in Liang and Parthasarathy (2016) though. For different datasets and
distance metrics, it is hard to obtain a single best value for this parameter and
preliminary experiments revealed that ROCOD is sensitive to this parameter.
Nevertheless, we also observed that it often achieves relatively good results
when the distance threshold used to find neighbours is set to 0 .9; hence, we
decided to set this parameter to 0 .9 by default.
6.2.1 QCAD Parameters Setting
As summarised in Table 4, the QCAD algorithm also requires several param-
eters to be set. First, in our contextual anomaly framework, we need to set
the number of nearest neighbours ( k) used to generate reference group. Sec-
ond, when creating quantile regression forests, we need to specify the following
parameters: the number of trees, the number of maximal features used to con-
struct a tree, and the number of minimal sample size to split in a node of tree.
Third, we need to specify the number of conditional quantiles ( l) to estimate
for an object in each behavioral feature. Last, we also need to set the num-
ber of features ( h) used to generate explanations. We set these parameters as
follows.