Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
4 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
Contextual anomaly detection assumes that an object is anomalous if it
strongly deviates from objects within its ‘context’ of similar objects. The appar-
ent contradiction in this assumption is explained by the division of the features
into two disjoint subsets, i.e., contextual features and behavioral features. The
contextual features are only used to define the contexts, using some similarity
measure, while the behavioral features are only used to determine whether an
object deviates from other objects within its context. Domain knowledge often
leads to a natural division between contextual and behavioral features.
We observe that both contextual and dependency-based anomaly detection
methods identify anomalies by explicitly or implicitly exploring dependencies
between features. Concretely, dependency-based anomaly detection methods
model dependency relationships between all features explicitly, while con-
textual anomaly detection methods model dependency relationships between
behavioral and contextual features implicitly or explicitly. As far as we know
this connection has not yet been pointed out in the literature.
Approach and contributions.
In this paper, we introduce an approach for contextual anomaly detec-
tion and explanation that integrates the core principle of dependency-based
anomaly detection into contextual anomaly detection to obtain a very accurate
approach. As is common, we use regression analysis to model dependencies.
Existing methods for dependency-based and contextual anomaly detection
that use regression, however, typically only estimate the conditional mean
of the response variable and directly interpret that as ‘normal’ value. This
strongly limits how well anomalies can be detected, as the conditional mean
provides very limited information about the conditional distribution. We there-
fore use quantile regression, which can model a conditional distribution in
much more detail by estimating conditional quantiles. Figure 1(c) shows how
conditional quantiles provide more information about the relationship between
weight and height than a conditional mean could.
More specifically, a subset of the features, dubbed contextual features,
are used to define the context of an object, while the remaining features,
dubbed behavioral features, are used for detecting deviations within a con-
text. In this paper we assume that the contextual features can be mixed but
all behavioral features are numerical. Given this context and our aims, we
use Quantile Regression Forests (Meinshausen, 2006) to perform predictions
for each behavioral feature and obtain corresponding uncertainty quantifica-
tions. By summing the quantified uncertainties (with a wider quantile interval
representing a higher level of uncertainty) for all individual behavioral fea-
tures, we obtain the anomaly score for a data instance. By attributing parts of
the anomaly score to individual behavioral features, the approach intrinsically
provides explanations in the sense that it can convey to which extent which
features contributed to making the instance an anomaly. This offers advan-
tages to post-hoc explanation methods such as SHAP (Lundberg and Lee,
2017), which we do not consider ‘attributable’ for the following two reasons.
First, the post-hoc explanation may not match the information/rationale used