Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
16 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
(b)(a)
Fig. 3 (a) Estimated conditional quantiles {Q0.1, Q0.2, . . . , Q0.9} for a behavioral feature
conditioned on contextual features. (b) Zooming in on the area between Q0.40 and Q0.50,
we see that percentiles are more likely to be sufficiently detailed than the quantiles in (a).
to all have equal potential to contribute to the overall anomaly score. After
this, the data point, its reference group, and its anomaly score are appended
to the anomaly score list (Ln 10). Finally, the anomaly score list is returned
as output (Ln 12).
Within the inner for loop, we first learn a quantile regression forest using
behavioral feature bq as response variable and the data point’s reference group
R(x, k) as training data (Ln 6). All contextual features C are used as pre-
dictor variables for every constructed QRF. We then use the learned quantile
regression forest, the features, and the data point to compute the raw partial
anomaly score (Ln 7), which we will motivate and explain in detail next.
QRF-based anomaly score
As argued in the Introduction and Subsection 4.1, taking the distance between
a data point and a conditional mean as basis for a contextual anomaly score
may be too limiting: this only works if all ‘normal’ data points reside close to
the mean. Instead, we aim to—conceptually—consider the entire conditional
probability density function and use the local density of a given data point as a
proxy for anomalousness: the lower the density, the higher the anomaly score.
Directly accurately estimating the density function is hard though, especially
in areas of low density, which are of particular importance to us.
This is where the quantile regression forests come in: given sufficient
training data, they accurately learn the conditional cumulative distribution
function, which can be queried in inverse form, i.e., through conditional
quantiles. When querying a quantile regression forest, this can be done at
different granularities. For example, Figure 3(a) shows that conditional quan-
tiles {Q0.1, Q0.2, . . . , Q0.9} may very well be insufficient to accurately describe
a conditional distribution as they overly smooth the underlying distribution
and thus fail to capture the nuances accurately, while Figure 3(b) show that
conditional percentiles, i.e., {Q0.01, Q0.02, . . . , Q0.99}, are much more likely to
provide sufficient detail.