Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
44 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
into a six-month trial of remote monitoring equipment for remote symptom
progression monitoring. The features such as subject, age, sex, test time,
Jitter, Jitter Abs, Jitter RAP, Jitter PPQ5, Jitter DDP, Shimmer, Shim-
mer dB, Shimmer APQ3, Shimmer APQ5, Shimmer APQ11, Shimmer DDA,
NHR, HNR, RPDE, DF A, PPE descirbe the background information, and
thus are used as contextual features. Meanwhile, the corresponding scores
motor UPDRS and total UPDRS are used as behavioral features. This dataset
is downloaded from UCI, 19 containing no missing values.
Power Plant
This dataset contains 9568 records from a combined cycle power plant which
worked with full load from 2006 to 2011. Features such as hourly average ambi-
ent variables temperature, ambient pressure, relative humidity and exhaust
vacuum (e.g., T, AP, RH and EP) are considered as contextual features, while
the net hourly electrical energy output (EP) is regarded as behavioral feature.
This dataset is downloaded from UCI, 20 containing no missing values.
QS University Ranking
This dataset contains the QS rankings of the world universities from 2018
to 2020. We consider the wolrd rankings, national rankings and location of
each university from 2018 to 2020, i.e., World2018, National2018, World2019,
National2019,World2020, National2020, Country as contextual features. We
use six features that are considered for the ranking (i.e., Academic Reputa-
tion, Employer Reputation, Faculty to Student Ratio, Number of citations per
faculty, International Faculty, International Students) as behavioral features.
The original data is crawled from the QS website, 21 containing 475 records
after dropping missing values.
QSAR Fish Toxicity
This dataset contains 908 records about the fish Pimephales promelas. Specif-
ically, the six features describing the molecular of 908 chemicals will be used
as contextual features, and the corresponding acute aquatic toxicity measure
will be used as behavioral feature. This dataset is downloaded from UCI, 22
containing no missing values.
Synchronous Machine
This dataset contains 557 records from a real experimental set. This exper-
iment aims to construct a model to estimate the excitation current of
synchronous motors. Specifically, we use the features describing the load cur-
rent, power factor, power factor error and changing of excitation current (e.g.,
Iy, PF, e and dIf) as contextual features. Accordingly, the feature which
19https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Parkinsons+Telemonitoring
20https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Combined+Cycle+Power+Plant
21https://www.topuniversities.com/qs-world-university-rankings
22https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/QSAR+fish+toxicity