Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
10 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
For example, Amsterdam and Rotterdam could form the context of Lei-
den; they are both nearby and we have measurements for the same season.
Temperature and wind are similar for all three cities, but there was substan-
tially more rain in Leiden than in Amsterdam and Rotterdam. Hence, for that
reason Leiden could be flagged as an anomaly.
To formalise the problem, we introduce a generic ‘context function’ that
maps each possible data point to a subset of the dataset, i.e., its context, based
on the data point’s contextual features.
Problem 1: Contextual Anomaly Detection Given a dataset X with
a feature set F = ( C, B), a context function Context : C → Pow(X), an
anomaly detector Anomaly : B ×Pow(X) → R+, and a threshold ϕ, find all
data points for which the anomaly scores exceed ϕ and are thereby flagged
as anomalous—based on the behavioral features—within their individual
contexts, i.e., {(c, b) ∈ X | Anomaly(b, Context(c)) ≥ ϕ}.
Note that the context is determined based only on contextual feature val-
ues, and that the anomaly detector may only use the behavioral feature values
of the data points in the given context when establishing if the given data
point is anomalous or not.
In practice, analysts are not only interested in identifying anomalies, but
also need to know the underlying reasons for why a specific object is reported
as anomaly. This leads to the second problem that we consider.
Problem 2: Contextual Anomaly Explanation Given an anomalous
object x ∈ X and the context function Context and anomaly detector Anomaly
that were used to detect it, find the behavioral features B′ ⊆ B for which
x = (c, b) substantially deviates from Context(c).
3.2 Overall Approach
The problem statement in the previous section suggests a three-pronged
approach based on 1) context generation, 2) anomaly detection, and 3)
anomaly explanation. In this subsection we explain and illustrate the overall
approach that we propose, using the running example from Table 1.
Phase 1: Reference Group Generation
Many choices are possible for the context function; in this manuscript we
choose to use an object’s k nearest neighbours, which we refer to as reference
group. The most important reasons for this choice are that 1) once a global
contextual distance matrix has been computed the nearest neighbours of any
object can be found relatively quickly; 2) this approach only requires a distance
metric to be chosen, which can be defined for any type of data and be adapted
to the problem at hand; and 3) it is generic enough to allow for different uses
of the resulting contexts.
Given a dataset X with contextual feature set C, we first compute the
distance matrix M between all objects using only the contextual features.
Second, for any object x ∈ X, we find its k nearest neighbours in contextual