Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection 17
We use conditional percentiles for our anomaly score, because they provide
a high level of granularity while not requiring very large amounts of data to
be estimated accurately. As additional benefit, the difference between each
two consecutive percentiles is always assessed by a weighted combination of a
comparable number of training data points, i.e., at the cost of some smoothing
we do not suffer from extremely poor local density estimates in low density
areas.
To formally develop our anomaly score, we first define τi to be the ith
percentile, i.e., τi = Qi/100, ∀i ∈ [0, 100]. For any percentile interval, i.e., an
interval [τi, τi+1] defined by two consecutive percentiles i and i + 1, we have
by definition that it spans exactly 0.01 probability (see Figure 3(b)). We could
estimate the local density of a percentile interval and use that for our anomaly
score, but we aim for a score that becomes larger when a data point is deemed
to be more anomalousness.
To this end we define percentile interval width wi as the difference between
two consecutive percentiles i and i+1, i.e., τi+1−τi. As such, interval width can
be regarded as ‘inverse density’, meaning that width will increase as the local
density decreases. For example, in Figure 3(b) we have τ46 = 0 .5 and τ47 =
0.513, which gives w46 = 0 .013. Data points that fall in percentile intervals
having relatively large widths are more likely to be contextual anomalies, as
they reside in low-density areas of the conditional distribution.
The basic idea is thus to define the anomaly score for an object x and
behavioral feature bq as w(x|bq), i.e., the width of the (QRF-predicted) per-
centile interval in which the behavioral value of the data point falls. We need
to consider a special case though: the actual behavioral feature value bq may
be less than the smallest estimated conditional quantile, i.e., τ q
0 , or greater
than the largest estimated conditional quantile, i.e., τ q
100. That is, the actual
value may not fall in any estimated conditional percentile interval. To address
this we extrapolate beyond τ q
0 and τ q
100, leading to intermediate anomaly score
is(x|bq) =




1 + τ q
0 − bq
τ q
75 − τ q
25

max(w(x|bq)), if bq < τq
0 ;

1 + bq − τ q
100
τ q
75 − τ q
25

max(w(x|bq)), if bq > τq
100,
w(x|bq), otherwise,
(4)
where max(w(x|bq)) represents the maximum interval width of all conditional
percentile intervals for the behavioral feature bq.
Unfortunately, directly using Equation (4) as partial anomaly score would
make our approach prone to the so-called dictator effect : summing such
partial scores for a data point that strongly deviates in only a few behavioral
features would lead to a larger anomaly score than anomalous data points
deviating moderately in many behavioral features. As a result, data points
with few, strong deviations would ‘dictate’ highest scores; this is undesirable.
To avoid the dictator effect, we truncate the partial anomaly scores to a
predefined maximum and arrive at the final partial anomaly score as