Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection 19
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8behavioral feature
actual value
Q3
Median
Q1
Fig. 4 Anomaly beanplot giving insight in what the quantile regression forest learned for a
particular data point and behavioral feature, and why the data point is (not) considered an
anomaly. The short blue lines indicate the conditional percentiles τ0, τ1, . . . , τ100 as learned
by the QRF (top to bottom), for the given data point and behavioral feature. As in a box
plot, the (cyan) box indicates first quartile ( τ25), median ( τ50), and third quartile ( τ75).
The wider red area represents probability densities as estimated based on the conditional
percentiles. Finally, the black line indicates the actual value that the data point has.
In addition, we demonstrate the robustness of QCAD with regard to the
‘number of nearest neighbours’ hyperparameter by means of a sensitivity anal-
ysis, and conduct several ablation studies to investigate the impact of the
hyperparameters. For reasons of space and brevity, the sensitivity analysis and
ablation studies are given in Appendices C and D.
6.1 Data
It is challenging to evaluate unsupervised anomaly detection algorithms due
to the lack of commonly agreed-upon benchmark data, and down-sampling
classification datasets has been criticized for its variation in the nature of the
resulting outliers (F¨ arber et al, 2010; Campos et al, 2016).
When evaluating unsupervised contextual anomaly detection algorithms,
this problem is further compounded by the requirement to have both con-
textual and behavioral features, and—more importantly—treating those dif-
ferently (Liang and Parthasarathy, 2016). Consequently, a generally accepted
approach is to artificially inject contextual anomalies into existing datasets
using a perturbation scheme.
6.1.1 Data Preprocessing
To make the datasets suitable to all anomaly detection methods, we need to
preprocess them before injecting contextual anomalies. First, we leverage Label