Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
40 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
Zhao Y, Nasrullah Z, Li Z (2019) Pyod: A python toolbox for scalable outlier
detection. Journal of Machine Learning Research 20:1–7
Zheng G, Brantley SL, Lauvaux T, et al (2017) Contextual spatial outlier
detection with metric learning. In: Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp
2161–2170
Appendix A Complexity Analysis
The computational overhead of our QCAD framework mainly comes from two
parts: the calculation of Gower’s Distance matrix using contextual features,
and the calculation of anomaly score using all features based on Quantile
Regression Forests.
The time complexity of calculating Gower’s Distance matrix isO(N 2Dcnt),
where N represents the sample size and Dcnt denotes the number of contextual
features. In addition, the time complexity of constructing a random forest is
O(ntree · nf eature· klog(k)) and using it for prediction is O(ntree · nf eature)
(Buczak and Guven, 2015), where ntree is the number of trees used to form
a random forest, nf eature denotes the number of dimensions (i.e., Dcnt at
most) and k indicates the number of samples used to construct the forest (i.e.,
the number of nearest neighbours in our case). Hence, the time complexity
of constructing N quantile regression forests in Dbhv behavioral features is
O(ntree · Dcnt · klog(k) · N · Dbhv). Moreover, we have to estimate 100 different
quantiles using each quantile regression forest, resulting in O((ntree · Dcnt ·
klog(k) +ntree · Dcnt · 100) · N · Dbhv). Therefore, using our default setting leads
to O((100 · Dcnt · min(500, N
2 ) · log(min(500, N
2 )) + 100· Dcnt · 100) · N · Dbhv).
In the worst case, it is O(105N DcntDbhv).
Overall, the time complexity of our method is O(105N DcntDbhv +N 2Dcnt)
in the worst case. Particularly, the time complexity becomesO(105N DcntDbhv)
when N <105 (i.e., for small and medium datasets). Besides, the construction
of quantile regression forests for each object in each behavioral feature can
easily be performed in a parallel way, thus reducing the time complexity to
O(105N Dcnt + N 2Dcnt) in the worst case.
Appendix B Dataset Description
Abalone
The dataset contains 4177 abalone physical measurement records. Specifi-
cally, we use the features Sex, Length, Diameter and Height as contextual
features. Accordingly, we use the features Whole Weight, Shucked Weight, Vis-
cera Weight, Shell Weight and Rings as behavioral features. This dataset is
downloaded from UCI, 5 containing no missing values.
5https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/abalone