Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection 15
point and its reference group. The algorithm is dubbed QCAD—for Quantile-
based Contextual Anomaly Detection—and forms the core of our approach; it
is introduced in Subsection 5.1. Finally, Section 5.2 describes how the found
anomalies are explained by decomposing the anomaly score in the third phase.
Algorithm 1 Quantile-based Contextual Anomaly Detection (QCAD)
Input: Dataset X; contextual feature set C; behavioral feature set B; number
of behavioral features Q; number of nearest neighbours k; number of con-
ditional quantiles to estimate nq; number of trees nt; maximum number of
features used in a tree nf ; minimum number of samples to split a node ns.
Output: Anomaly score list S
1: procedure QCAD(X, C, B, k, nq, nt, nf , ns)
2: S ⇐ {}
3: for x ∈ X do
4: R(x, k) ⇐ GetRef erenceGroup(X, C, x, k)
5: for q ∈ {1, 2, ..., Q} do
6: QRF ⇐ LearnQRF (R(x, k), C, bq, nq, nt, nf , ns)
7: s(x|bq) ⇐ AnomalyScore (QRF, C, bq, x)
8: end for
9: s(x) = 1
Q
PQ
q=1 s(x|bq)
10: S.append((x, R(x, k), s(x)))
11: end for
12: return S
13: end procedure
5.1 Detecting Anomalies with Quantile Regression
Forests
Algorithm 1 outlines the QCAD algorithm, which takes a dataset and a number
of hyperparameters as input and outputs a list of all data points together
with their reference groups and computed anomaly scores. Specifically, we
assume that the contextual features can be mixed but all behavioral features
are numerical. We will first describe the overall algorithm, and then go into
the specifics of the score computation.
Algorithm
After initializing the empty score list (Line 2), the algorithm iterates
over all data points in dataset X (Ln 3–11). For each object x =
(c1, ..., cp, ..., cP , b1, ..., bq, ...bQ) = ( c, b) we first obtain the reference group
that was computed in the first phase (Ln 4). We then iterate over all features
in behavioral feature set X in order to compute a partial anomaly score for
each behavioral feature (Ln 5–8). These partial anomaly scores are summed to
obtain the anomaly score for x (Ln 9), i.e., we assume the behavioral features