Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
2 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
1 Introduction
According to the well-known definition of Hawkins (1980), an anomaly 1 is an
object that is notably different from most remaining objects. Chandola et al
(2009) subdivided anomalies into three types: point anomalies (an object is
considered anomalous when compared against the rest of objects), contextual
anomalies (an object is anomalous in a specific context), and collective anoma-
lies (a collection of objects is anomalous with respect to the entire dataset).
The analysis of anomalies has a wide range of applications, such as in net-
work security (Ahmed et al, 2016a), bioinformatics (Spinosa and Carvalho,
2005), fraud detection (Ahmed et al, 2016b), and fault detection and isolation
(Hwang et al, 2009).
Anomaly analysis consists of two equally important tasks: anomaly detec-
tion and anomaly explanation. A wealth of ‘shallow’ machine learning based
methods, i.e., not based on deep learning, have been proposed to detect anoma-
lies (Chandola et al, 2009). More recently, many deep learning based anomaly
detection methods have also been developed (Pang et al, 2021). However,
deep learning based anomaly detection methods are notoriously known as
not being interpretable, in the sense that generally both the model itself is
non-transparent and the resulting anomaly scores are challenging to interpret
without the use of a post-hoc explainer. In this paper it is especially the lat-
ter that we consider to be problematic, as post-hoc explanations often rely
not only on the model but also on the specific explainer used. In addition,
deep learning methods typically require large amounts of data and training the
models is a time-consuming process. In many real-world applications, however,
‘native’ interpretability (i.e., without posthoc explainer) may be required, and
limited data and/or computation time may be available. For these reasons, in
this paper we restrict our focus to ‘shallow’ machine learning based methods.
In correspondence with this choice, we focus on settings where the amount
of data is smaller than is typically required to learn accurate deep models.
Most existing shallow methods only consider point anomaly detection, largely
ignoring contextual anomaly detection. Moreover, anomaly explanation has
received very limited attention. In this paper, we address both the problem of
contextual anomaly detection and that of anomaly explanation, for small to
moderately sized tabular data having categorical and/or quantitative features.
Shallow anomaly detectors are typically categorised into distance-based,
density-based, and distribution-based approaches (Wang et al, 2019). Distance-
based and density-based methods use knowledge about the spatial proximity of
objects to identify anomalies, while distribution-based methods use knowledge
about the distribution of the data to detect anomalies. These methods work
under the assumption that objects having a large distance or different density
from their spatial neighbours are anomalous or objects that take rare values
under a marginal or joint distribution of features are anomalous , respectively.
1Given the fact that “outlier” is often used as a synonym for “anomaly” in the anomaly detection
literature, we will use them interchangeably in this paper.