Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection 5
by the model to detect an anomaly (Li et al, 2022). Second, it has recently
been shown (Fokkema et al, 2022) that attribute-based explanations cannot
be both recourse sensitive and robust, which is a good reason to avoid such
explainers when possible and use a ‘native’ attribution-based method instead.
As far as we are aware, we are the first to use quantile regression for
dependency-based or contextual anomaly detection. Specifically, we choose to
employ Quantile Regression Forests for three reasons. First, it can model both
linear and non-linear dependency between features. Second, in the paper that
introduced the method it was empirically shown to outperform other condi-
tional quantile estimators in most cases. Figure 1(d) shows how the estimated
conditional quantiles can be used to approximate the conditional probability
density at different locations, which we can use to accurately detect anoma-
lies. Moreover, the quantiles are helpful to explain why an object is considered
an anomaly without having to explicitly refer to other objects.
The main contributions of our work can be summarized as follows: (1) We
identify a connection between dependency-based traditional anomaly detec-
tion methods and contextual anomaly detection methods, and exploit this
observation to introduce a novel high-level approach to contextual anomaly
detection and explanation; (2) We instantiate this generic approach using
quantile regression (and Quantile Regression Forests specifically) for anomaly
detection and a beanplot-based visualization for anomaly explanation; and
(3) We perform extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets to
empirically demonstrate the effectiveness, and interpretability of the proposed
method when compared to state-of-the-art methods.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses
related work, both in contextual and traditional anomaly detection. Section
3 introduces notation, formalizes the problem, and presents the high-level
approach that we propose. Section 4 then describes some technical preliminar-
ies, most notably Quantile Regression Forests. Section 5 introduces QCAD,
our proposed method for Quantile-based Contextual Anomaly Detection and
Explanation that instantiates the high-level approach. Section 6 empirically
compares QCAD to its competitors, and provides a case study that investi-
gates the use of QCAD to find exceptional football players from data. Section
7 concludes the paper.
2 Related work
We first discuss related work on contextual anomaly detection and explana-
tion, and then proceed with the two most closely related types of traditional
anomaly detection: dependency-based and subspace-based anomaly detection.
2.1 Contextual Anomaly Detection and Explanation
Contextual anomaly detection has received particular attention in spatial data
(Cai et al, 2013), temporal data (Salvador et al, 2004), and spatio-temporal
data (Smets et al, 2009), where spatial and/or temporal features are used to