Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
6 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
define contexts. These methods are not directly applicable to other domains,
where the contexts are defined by other types of features; ‘generic’ contextual
anomaly detection has received limited attention in the community.
CAD (Song et al, 2007) is a seminal work that introduced generic contex-
tual anomaly detection. It assumes a user-specified partition of features into
contextual (called ‘environmental’) and behavioral (called ‘indicator’) features,
and uses Gaussian Mixture Models to fit the distributions of the contextual
and behavioral feature spaces. Dependencies between contextual features and
behavioral features are then learned by means of ‘mapping functions’, and an
object is considered anomalous if it violates the learned functions. For this to
work CAD assumes that both the contextual and behavioral features consist of
an unknown number of multiple Gaussian components, which may be a strong
assumption in practice. Further, CAD can only handle numerical features and
is computationally very expensive. Our proposed method makes no assump-
tions about the distribution of the features, can deal with mixed contextual
features and numerical behavioral features, and we will show empirically that it
is computationally more efficient than CAD while achieving a higher detection
accuracy.
ROCOD (Liang and Parthasarathy, 2016) is also closely related, and uses
local and global models of expected behavior to describe the dependencies
between contextual and behavioral features. Concretely, standard regression
models such as CART are used to learn global patterns, with contextual
features as predictor variables and behavioral features as response variables.
Local patterns are computed based on the means of behavioral feature val-
ues of an object’s neighbours. An object’s actual value is compared to the
local and global pattern, and the weighted average of these differences forms
the anomaly score. As the conditional mean describes only one aspect of a
conditional distribution, and is not necessarily the point with the highest prob-
ability of occurrence (i.e., the mode). To address this, our method employs
quantile regression analysis to estimate conditional quantiles, which provide a
much more complete description of the conditional distribution. As a result,
our method empirically outperforms ROCOD in terms of accuracy.
With the increasing use of anomaly detection algorithms in safety-critical
domains, such as healthcare and manufacturing, the ethical and regulatory
obligations to provide explanations for the high-stakes decisions made by these
algorithms has become more pronounced (Li et al, 2022). Existing contextual
anomaly detection do not provide such explanations though, and non-trivial
modifications would be needed for them to do so. Specifically, CAD (Song et al,
2007) computes the anomaly score of a data instance by measuring its devi-
ation from the mapping functions that are learned from the majority of data
instances. This approach poses a challenge in generating intrinsic explanations,
as it does not allow for the attribution of the anomaly score to individual fea-
tures. Further, ROCOD (Liang and Parthasarathy, 2016), the other known
method for contextual anomaly detection, calculates the weighted average of
an instance’s differences to the learned local and global patterns as its anomaly