Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
8 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
and other features. Babbar and Chawla (2012) use Linear Gaussian Bayesian
networks to detect anomalies that violate causal relationships.
LoPAD (Lu et al, 2020b) first uses a Bayesian network to find the Markov
Blankets of each feature. Then, a predictive model (e.g., CART) is learnt
for each individual feature as response variable, with its Markov Blankets as
predictor variables. Given an object, LoPAD computes the Euclidean distance
between its actual value and predicted value (i.e., conditional mean) as its
anomaly score, for each feature. The resulting anomaly scores are normalized
and summed to obtain the final anomaly score for an object. The method
does not distinguish contextual and behavioral features and—like ROCOD—
uses conditional means to represent the conditional distribution. Consequently,
LoPAD cannot (accurately) detect contextual anomalies.
2.2.2 Subspace-based Anomaly Detection
Subspace-based anomaly detection seeks to find anomalies in part of the fea-
ture space. Specifically, Kriegel et al (2009) propose SOD to identify outliers in
varying subspaces. Concretely, they construct axis-parallel subspaces spanned
by the neighbours of a given object. On this basis, they investigate whether
this object deviates significantly from its neighbours on any of these subspaces.
Furthermore, Kriegel et al (2012) extend this work to determine whether an
object is anomalous on arbitrarily oriented subspaces spanned by its neigh-
bours. Nguyen et al (2013) propose to find subspaces with strong mutual
correlations and then identify anomalies on these subspaces. Finally, Cabero
et al (2021) use archetype analysis to project the feature space into various
subspaces with linear correlations based on nearest neighbours. On this basis,
they explore outliers by ensembling the results obtained on relevant subspaces.
Overall, these methods pursue to identify anomalies in a subset of features,
but treat all features equally and are thus not suitable to identify contextual
anomalies.
3 Contextual Anomaly Detection and
Explanation
We first introduce the necessary terminology and notations, and illus-
trate this with the running example depicted in Table 1. A dataset
X = {x1, . . . ,xi, . . . ,xN } contains N instances (or data points) over
the set of features (a.k.a. attributes or variables) denoted by F =
{f 1, . . . ,f j, . . . ,f D}. xj
i denotes the value of the i-th object, xi, for the j-
th feature, f j. In the running example, we have N = 16, D = 6, F =
{Latitude, Longitude, Season, T emperature, Rain, W ind}, and xRain
1 = 69.
We assume that feature set F is divided into two disjoint feature
sets (typically using domain knowledge): a contextual feature set C =
{c1, ...,cp, . . . ,cP } and a behavioral feature setB = {b1, . . . ,bq, . . . ,bQ}, such
that D = P + Q, F = C ∪ B, and C ∩ B = ∅. Without loss of generality, we can
rearrange the features of an object xi = (x1
i , ..., xj
i , ..., xD
i ) and represent it as