Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection 3
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 1 Different types of anomaly detection. (a) Distance- and density-based methods both
consider object B to be abnormal, because it is far away from other objects and in a low-
density region. (b) Dependency-based methods model the relationship between height and
weight, and consequently consider object B to be normal. (c) Conditional quantiles provide
more information about the conditional distribution than just the mean, and (d) can be used
to visualise—using beanplots (or, rather, a variation of a beanplot combined with boxplots,
see Section 5.2 for details)—why a certain object is considered (ab)normal.
Using either of these assumptions may lead to false positives though. For exam-
ple, as shown in Figure 1(a), these methods will mistakenly identify object B
as an anomaly if the aim is to detect people that are over- or underweight.
As this is often undesirable, we aim to define and detect anomalies from
another perspective, that is, we assume that objects that violate a dependency,
i.e., a relationship between features, are anomalous . This is the idea behind
dependency-based anomaly detection (Lu et al, 2020a), which is not new but
has received limited attention compared to other types of anomalies. It lever-
ages the intrinsic structure and properties of the data to find potentially more
relevant anomalies. For example, Figure 1(b) shows that this approach will
identify object B as normal by modelling the dependency between height and
weight.
Traditional anomaly detection techniques—including distance-, density-,
and dependency-based methods—treat all features equally when identifying
anomalies. However, in domains such as healthcare, sensor networks, and envi-
ronment protection, some features should never be used directly to quantify
anomalousness. For instance, forest fire detection systems should not treat
‘deviating’ values of latitude, longitude, date, and time as an indication of an
anomaly. We should not simply discard these features either though, as they
may contain relevant information. For example, the ‘normal’ temperature may
be higher for certain regions than for others. This motivates us to investigate
contextual anomaly detection, which can take such extra features into account.