Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
32 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
0 5 10 15 20 25
Goals
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0Assists
Anomaly Score
0 20 40 60 80 100
Fig. 7 Distribution of all players in the behavioral space Assists × Goals, and their corre-
sponding anomaly scores given by QCAD. The red curves represent the estimated densities
of the joint distribution at different levels, the histograms indicate the marginal distribu-
tions. A larger and darker green dot represents a larger anomaly score as given by QCAD.
(age of the player), Matches (number of matches played), Starts (number of
matches that the player was in the starting lineup), and Mins (number of
minutes the player played overall) as contextual features. Two performance
statistics, Goals (number of goals scored by the player) and Assists (number
of assists given by player), are regarded as behavioral features.
Figure 7 depicts the distribution of all data objects in behavioral space
Goals × Assists. Without considering contextual information, traditional
anomaly detectors such as HBOS, LOF, IForest will treat objects in dense areas
(i.e., objects residing inside the red curves) as normal objects. In contrast, our
contextual anomaly detector QCAD can detect anomalies in dense areas by
considering contextual information (i.e., green objects residing inside the red
curves). Concretely, Figure 7 also presents the anomaly scores given by QCAD
(with default settings). For example, player Matheus Pereira—who achieved
11 goals and 6 assists—is reported as an ‘anomaly’ (i.e., as having a relatively
high anomaly score) by QCAD but as ‘normal’ by traditional anomaly detec-
tors. Conversely, QCAD considers Patrick Bamford, a player with 17 goals and
7 assists (in a sparse area), to be normal, while traditional anomaly detectors
consider him to be an anomaly.
In addition to giving an anomaly score for each data object, QCAD can
also provide an explanation. For instance, for Matheus Pereira ( P osition1 =
”MF”, P osition2 = ”FW”, Age=24, M atches=33, Starts=30, M ins=2577),
Figure 8 shows the distribution of the values of each contextual feature for all