Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
30 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
The results on real-world datasets presented in Tables 6 and 7 show that
QCAD performs best overall when compared to its contenders, as witnessed by
its average ranking results. Concretely, QCAD outperforms the other methods
on 13 out of 20 real-world datasets in terms of PRC AUC and ROC AUC, and
on 11 out of 20 datasets in terms of P@n. On most of the remaining datasets,
QCAD is on par with its strongest competitors. For instance, HBOS achieves
the best performance on Forest Fires, Heart Failures, Hepatitis, and Indian
Liver Patient; QCAD’s performance on these datasets is comparable. The
number of contextual features in these datasets is often substantially less than
the number of behavioral features, reducing the contextual anomaly detection
problem to a traditional anomaly detection problem. QCAD is only slightly
worse than ROCOD on Power Plant and Toxicity in terms of PRC AUC. Note
that CAD produces surprisingly good results on the Bodyfat dataset, and sur-
passes other methods including QCAD. One possible explanation is that the
contexts and behaviors are both composed of well-separated Gaussian compo-
nents, and that the association between contextual and behavioral components
is strong.
PRC AUC ROC AUC Precision@n
Fig. 5 Critical difference diagram showing statistical difference comparisons between
QCAD and its contenders in terms of PRC AUC, ROC AUC and Precision@n. To achieve
this, we use Friedman tests (Friedman, 1937) followed by Nemenyi post hoc analysis
(Nemenyi, 1963) with a significance level of 0.05. The post-hoc Nemenyi test indicates there
are no significant differences within QCAD, CAD and ROCOD in terms of PRC AUC; there
are no significant differences within QCAD, ROCOD, HBOS and IForest in terms of ROC
AUC; there are no significant differences within QCAD, ROCOD, HBOS and CAD in terms
of Precision@n. However, one can see that QCAD consistently outperforms its contenders
by a large margin in three metrics.
We also observe that QCAD performs well on datasets with varying sam-
ple size, dimensionality, and rate of injected anomalies. Specifically, QCAD
achieved a high ROC AUC ( ≥ 0.85) on all datasets. This is much better than
the ROC AUC values close to 0 .50 obtained by ROCOD, CAD, HBOS, and
IForest on some datasets, implying they are random guessing. In addition,
QCAD attained high PRC AUC ( ≥ 0.8) and Precision@n values ( ≥ 0.7) on
most datasets. The lowest PRC AUC and Precision@n value are is 0.46 and
0.49, respectively, both obtained on the Toxicity dataset. Possible reasons for
QCAD’s moderate performance on Airfoil, BodyFat, Power plant, and Toxicity
are: the dependency relationship between behavioral features and contextual
features is not strong, or the dependency relationship is too complex for the
Quantile Regression Forests to capture. ROCOD, COD, HBOS, and IForest,
however, obtain PRC AUC values less than 0.70 and Precision@n values less
than 0.60 on most datasets. Moreover, HBOS and IForest sometimes attain