Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
20 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
Encoding (Seger, 2018) to transform categorical contextual features to numer-
ical form. Second, we employ Min-Max normalisation to scale all behavioral
features to [0 , 1]. Min-Max normalization is routinely used in many anomaly
detection and generally improves performance (Kandanaarachchi et al, 2020).
Gower’s Distance To be able to calculate the similarity between two
data points containing both categorical and numerical features, we can utilise
Gower’s distance (Gower, 1971). Specifically, the Gower’s distance between
data points ci = ( c1
i , ..., cp
i , ...cP
i ) and cj = ( c1
j , ..., cp
j , ...cP
j ) is defined as
1 − 1
P
PP
p=1 psp
ij, where psp
ij represents the partial similarity between data
instances ci and cj in the p-th dimension. For a numerical feature, psp
ij =
1 − |cp
i −cp
j |
max(cp)−min(cp) , with max( cp) and min( cp) denoting the maximum and
minimum value of all data points for the p-th feature, respectively. For a cate-
gorical feature, psp
ij = I(cp
i − cp
j ), where I(·) represents the indicator function.
Consequently, Gower’s distance between two data points is always in [0 , 1],
with a lower value indicating a larger similarity.
6.1.2 Perturbation Scheme for Outlier Injection
Song et al (2007) proposed a perturbation scheme to inject contextual anoma-
lies in datasets without ground-truth anomalies, which has become a de-facto
standard for the evaluation of contextual anomaly detection (Song et al, 2007;
Liang and Parthasarathy, 2016; Zheng et al, 2017; Calikus et al, 2021).
This perturbation scheme, however, has also been criticised for two rea-
sons (Song et al, 2007; Kuo et al, 2018). First, the objects obtained by simply
swapping the feature values are still likely to be contextually normal. Second,
some very common types of anomalies cannot be yielded through this pertur-
bation scheme. For example, one cannot obtain extreme values by swapping
features values in a clean dataset, whereas most anomaly detection methods
assume the training dataset is uncontaminated. To avoid these problems, Kuo
et al (2018) introduced another perturbation scheme to inject anomalies. We
develop a new perturbation scheme by refining this scheme, as follows.
Given a dataset X containing N data instances with contextual feature
set C = {c1, ...,cP } and behavioral feature set B = {b1, ...,bQ}, we first use
Min-Max normalization to scale the behavioral features of all objects to [0 , 1]
(keeping the contextual features intact), resulting in a new dataset ˜X. Sec-
ond, to inject m anomalies into ˜X, with 0 < m ≪ N , we select m objects
x1, . . . ,xm uniformly at random from ˜X. For each x = (c, b) in ˜X, c repre-
sents the contextual feature values andb denotes the behavioral feature values.
Third, for a selected object xi = ( ci, bi) = ( c1
i , ..., cp
i , ..., cP
i , b1
i , ..., bq
i , ..., bQ
i )
and behavioral feature bq, we sample a number uniformly at random from
[−0.5, −0.1] S[0.1, 0.5], and then add this random number to the behavioral
feature value of xi, namely bq
i , resulting in ˆbq
i . In the same manner, we repeat
this process for each behavioral feature, resulting in (ˆb1
i , ...,ˆbQ
i ), or ˆbi. Accord-
ingly, we generate a new object ˜x = (c, ˆb) as contextual anomaly. Fourth, we
repeat the third step for each selected object, leading to m perturbed objects.