Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection 41
Airfoil Self-Noise
This dataset contains 1503 records from a series of aerodynamic and acoustic
tests of airfoil blade sections. Specifically, we use the features describing the
frequency, the angle of attack, the chord length, the free-stream velocity and
the suction side displacement thickness (e.g., f, alpha, c, U infinity and delta)
as contextual features. Meanwhile, the feature describing the scaled sound
pressure level (e.g., SSPL) as behavioral feature. This dataset is downloaded
from UCI, 6 containing no missing values.
Bodyfat
This dataset contains the estimates of body density and the percentage of body
fat (used as behavioral features), which are determined by various body cir-
cumference measurements, such as, Age, Weight, Height, Neck circumference,
Chest circumference, Abdomen 2 circumference, Hip circumference, Thigh
circumference, Knee circumference, Ankle circumference, Biceps (extended)
circumference, Forearm circumference, and Wrist circumference (used as con-
textual features) for 252 men. The raw dataset includes no categorical features
and 0 missing values, downloaded from the CMU statlib. 7
Boston House Price
This dataset contains 583 records of the Boston house price. We use the fea-
tures describing the properties of the house and its surroundings, i.e., CRIM,
ZN, INDUS, CHAS, NOX, RM, AGE, DIS, RAD, TAX, PTRATIO, B, LSTAT
as contextual features, and the median value of owner-occupied homes, i.e.,
MED, as behavioral feature. This dataset is released by Harrison Jr and Rubin-
feld (1978) and downloaded from the CMU statlib 8. It remains 506 records
after dropping rows containing missing values.
Concrete Compressive Strength
This dataset contains 1030 records about the compressive strength of concrete.
We use the features describing the age and different ingredients as contextual
features, including C1, C2, C3, C4, C5, C6, C7 and Age. In addition, we use
the feature Strength as behavioral feature. This dataset is downloaded from
UCI, 9 containing no missing values.
El Nino
This dataset contains 178080 records of the oceanographic and surface mete-
orological readings, which are taken from buoys located throughout the
equatorial Pacific. We use the temporal and spatial features, i.e., Year, Month,
Day, Date, Latitude, Longitude as contextual features, and other features, i.e.,
Zonal Winds, Meridional Winds, Humidity, Air Temp, Sea Surface Temp as
6https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Airfoil+Self-Noise
7http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/datasets/bodyfat
8http://lib.stat.cmu.edu/datasets
9https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Concrete+Compressive+Strength