Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
12 Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection
We require anomaly detectors to be attributable, meaning that an anomaly
score s generated by an anomaly detector must be decomposable into individ-
ual contributions towards anomalousness for each behavioral feature using the
anomaly detector’s native structure.
Phase 3: Anomaly Explanation
For each anomalous object am, we first report its reference group R(am, k)
using the distance matrix obtained in Phase 1. Second, we report its anomaly
score sm, as obtained in Phase 2. Moreover, we decompose sm into individual
contributions from each behavioral feature bq ∈ B, resulting in a list of raw
anomaly scores sm = {sm1, ..., smq, ..., smQ}. This is possible because sm is
attributable. Next, we report the top- h raw anomaly scores in sm with their
corresponding behavioral features, where h can be specified by the analyst. The
top-h behavioral features and raw scores enable analysts to better understand
why a specific object is flagged as a contextual anomaly.
For example, Figure 2 (b) reports object x12 as an anomaly. To explain
why, we first inspect its reference group R(x12, 3) = {x10, x11, x12}, which
contains the three objects most similar to x12. Second, we report its anomaly
score, i.e., 90. Next, we decompose the score and report the behavioral features
with the highest deviations, e.g., W ind. We can interpret the result as: x12
deviates substantially in W indwhen compared to {x10, x11, x12}, which are
all similar in terms of Latitude, Longitude and Season.
4 Preliminaries
We first define the conditional mean and conditional quantiles, which we use to
motivate the use of conditional quantiles for anomaly detection. Next, we detail
quantile regression forests, a model class that can robustly estimate conditional
quantiles. Readers familiar with these concepts can skip this section.
4.1 From Conditional Mean to Conditional Quantiles
Given a real-valued variable V and a set of variables U, regression analysis
aims to model the distribution of V conditioned on U. Specifically, it takes V
as the response variable and U as the predictor variables to construct a model
that can be used to predict V based on U. Standard regression uses training
data {(U1, V1), ...,(Un, Vn)} to learn a model that estimates the conditional
mean E(V | U = u) and uses that as prediction forV when U = u is given. For
example, Least Squares Regression fits a model ˆθ by minimising the expected
squared error loss, namely ˆθ = argmin
θ
E{(V − ˆV (θ))2) | U = u}.
The conditional mean, however, is only a single statistic of the conditional
distribution and is thereby limited in what it can capture. For example, if the
conditional distribution is a multi-modal distribution, the mean is insufficient
to describe it (regardless of whether we also consider the standard deviation).