Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection 45
describes the excitation current of synchronous machine (namely If ) is used
as behavioral feature. This dataset is downloaded from UCI, 23 containing no
missing values.
Yacht Hydrodynamics
This dataset contains 308 records about the features of sailing yachts. We
use the features describing the dimensions, velocity and hydrodynamic
performance of yachts, namely Longitudinal position, Prismatic coefficient,
Length displacement ratio, Beam draught ratio, Length beam ratio,
Froude number as contextual features, and the feature concerning the
residuary resistance per unit weight of displacement, namely resistance, as
behavioral feature. This dataset is downloaded from the UCI machine learning
repository, 24 containing no missing values.
Appendix C Parameter Sensitivity Analysis
The parameter k directly affects the effectiveness and efficiency of anomaly
detector in anomaly detection phase. If our dataset is labelled, we can use
techniques like grid-search and cross-validation to set an optimal k for a
specific dataset. However, anomaly detection is usually an unsupervised learn-
ing problem, which makes it impossible to set an optimal k. Hence, we can
only empirically give some rules of thumb to set k according to the proper-
ties of specific dataset (i.e., sample size, dimensionality and estimated rate of
anomaly). Therefore, we perform intensive experiments on synthetic and real-
world datasets with a wide range of sample sizes, dimensionalities and rates
of injected anomalies to investigate the sensitivity of our algorithm on this
parameter.
As shown in Figure C1, increasing the number of neighbours, i.e., k, will
lead to a better performance in terms of PRC AUC, ROC AUC and Pre-
cision@n when k is small (about N/10 for most datasets). However, the
performance gain gradually slows down as k increases, and the performance
finally reaches a plateau with an increase of k. After that, further increasing k
yields only a negligible performance gain, at the cost of runtime. Therefore, we
set k to N/2 for small dataset and 500 for medium dataset after taking a trade-
off between the accuracy and runtime cost. Overall, different from other k-NN
based anomaly detectors which are sensitive to this parameter, our method
QCAD is stable on parameter k as long as its value is not too small.
Appendix D Ablation Study
D.1 Scaling Conditional Quantile Interval Length
In our method section, we have defined a matched conditional quantile inter-
val length for an observation bq when bq > τq
100 or bq < τq
0 as in Equation
23https://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Synchronous+Machine+Data+Set
24archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Yacht+Hydrodynamics