Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection 13
To allow for more comprehensive descriptions of conditional distributions,
Koenker and Hallock (2001) proposed to estimate conditional quantiles . As
usual, quantiles are splitting points that divide the range of the probability
distribution into consecutive intervals having equal probability. Given a contin-
uous variable V , its conditional α-quantile given U = u is defined by Qα(u) =
inf{v : F (v | U = u) ≥ α}, where F (v | U = u) = P (V ≤ v | U = u) is the
cumulative distribution function. Conditional quantiles have the potential to
describe the full conditional distribution of response variable V .
Existing regression-based anomaly detection methods typically estimate
the conditional mean of V by its expected value ˆv, and then use the Euclidean
distance between its actual value and the expected value, i.e., dist(v, ˆv), as
anomaly score. It is hard to interpret this distance though, as the shape and
range of the conditional distribution are unknown. In this paper we address this
by estimating conditional quantiles instead. In particular, we will show that
we can use conditional quantiles to approximate the probability of observing
a certain data point in its context, which is then used for the anomaly score.
4.2 Quantile Regression Forests
Tree-based regression approaches—such as CART, M5, and Random Forests—
are often used to learn both linear and non-linear dependencies. Meinshausen
(2006) extended the Random Forest to Quantile Regression Forest, which
estimates and predicts conditional quantiles instead of means.
Specifically, a quantile regression forest (QRF) is constructed by building
an ensemble of K independent decision trees to estimate the full conditional
cumulative distribution function of V given U = u, based on n indepen-
dent observations {(U1, V1), ...,(Ui, Vi), ...,(Un, Vn)}. Each Ui consists of d
dimensions. The estimated full conditional distribution can be written as
ˆF (v|U = u) = ˆP (V ≤ v|U = u) = ˆE(I(V ≤ v)|U = u) =
nX
i=1
ωi(u)I(Vi ≤ v),
(1)
where ωi(u) denotes the weight assigned to observation ( Ui, Vi).
The decision trees that make up a quantile regression forest are constructed
similarly to how a random forest is learned, i.e., for each individual tree m ≤ n
data points are sampled (with replacement), d
′
≪ d features are randomly
selected, and a criterion such as information gain is used to recursively split
the data and tree. Each leaf node keeps all its observations though. K decision
trees, namely T1(θ), ..., TK(θ), are independently grown to form a forest.
Once the forest has been constructed, for a given U = u each decision tree
Tj(θ) is traversed to find the leaf node that u resides in. A weight ωi(u, Tj(θ))
is then computed for each observation Ui, with i ∈ {1, ..., n}: if observation
Ui and u reside in the same leaf node, then ωi(u, Tj(θ)) is defined as 1 divided
by the number of samples residing in the leaf node. Otherwise, ωi(u, Tj(θ)) is