Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template
Explainable Contextual Anomaly Detection 25
• The number of nearest neighbours (k): the sensitivity analysis (see appendix)
indicates that our approach is robust with respect to this parameter as
long as its value is not overly small. By default, we set this parameter to
min(N/2, 500), where N is the sample size.
• The number of conditional quantiles to estimate ( nq): theoretically, an
increase in this number will result in better performance in terms of accuracy,
at the expense of a larger running time. However, preliminary experiments
show that increasing this number beyond 100 will only produce slightly
better results. Therefore, we set it to 100 by default.
• The number of trees used to construct a quantile regression forest ( nt): in
theory, a larger number of trees will produce better performance in terms
of accuracy, but at the cost of a larger running time. We empirically found
that 100 trees usually gives good results and further increasing the number
of trees leads to negligible improvement. Due to time constraints, we set this
number to 10 in all experiments in this paper.
• The number of maximal features used to construct a tree in a quantile
regression forest ( nf ): Meinshausen (2006) demonstrated the stability of
quantile regression forest on this parameter, and set this parameter to 1/3 of
the number of variables in their experiments. However, in our experiments,
sometimes the number of contextual features is less than 3. To render quan-
tile regression forests applicable on various datasets, we set this parameter
to the number of all variables by default.
• The minimal sample size for the node of a tree to be split ( ns): as indicated
in Meinshausen (2006), different values of this parameter do not seem to
have much effect on the results, and our preliminary experiments are also
in line with this statement. Therefore, we set this number to 10 by default,
as also used in Meinshausen (2006).
• The number of features used to generate explanations (h): This parameter is
set to min(|B|, 3) by default. However, the end-users can set this parameter
according to their preferences as long as its value is between 0 and|B|, where
|B| represents the number of behavioral features.
For reproducibility, we make all code and datasets publicly available 3.
6.3 Evaluation Criteria
PRC AUC (Liang and Parthasarathy, 2016; Kuo et al, 2018), ROC AUC
(Micenkov´ a et al, 2014, 2015; Pasillas-D ´ ıaz and Ratt´ e, 2016), and Precision@n
(Aggarwal and Sathe, 2017) are widely used for the evaluation and compari-
son of anomaly detection methods that generate a full list of anomaly scores
for all observations. They are defined as follows:
• Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC), which is obtained by plotting
the true positive rate (y-axis) versus the false positive rate (x-axis) at var-
ious threshold settings. The area under this curve, namely ROC AUC, is a
threshold-agnostic performance measure widely used in anomaly detection;
3https://github.com/ZhongLIFR/QCAD